ARTEMIS-3365 Broker Balancers (#3634)
apache/activemq-artemis: docs/user-manual/en/broker-balancers.md

# Broker Balancers
Apache ActiveMQ Artemis broker balancers allow incoming client connections to be distributed across multiple [target brokers](target-brokers).
The target brokers are grouped in [pools](#pools) and the broker balancers use a [target key](#target-key)
to select a target broker from a pool of brokers according to a [policy](#policies).

## Target Broker
Target broker is a broker that can accept incoming client connections and is local or remote.
The local target is a special target that represents the same broker hosting the broker balancer.

> The remote target is another broker reachable by the broker that hosts the broker balancer.

Reviewer: it is just reachable. full stop. Does it really need to host a balancer?

Reviewer: that comment is for line 9.

## Target Key
The broker balancer uses a target key to select a target broker.

> It is a string retrieved from an incoming client connections, the supported values are:

Reviewer: client connection (not plural)

* `SNI_HOST` is the hostname indicated by the client in the SNI extension of the TLS protocol;
* `SOURCE_IP` is the source IP address of the client;
* `USER_NAME` is the username indicated by the client.

## Pools
The pool is a group of brokers and checks periodically their state.
Including the local target broker in the pool allows broker hosting the broker balancer to accept incoming client connections. 
By default, a pool doesn't include the local target broker, to include it the `local-target-enabled` parameter must be `true`.

> A pool becomes ready when the minimum number of ready targets defined by the `quorum-size` parameter is reached.

Reviewer: is it just quorum (the size is implicit, as in quorum is the minimum number of members that make the group valid.

Author: I used the `quorum-size` name just to be consistent with other parameter names, see replicatedPolicyType and replicaPolicyType.

> This behaviour avoids weird distribution at startup or after a restart.

Reviewer: what happens when the quorum is set and not reached? Does the connection just get rejected? expecting a retry?

Author: if the quorum is not reached and the target key is not present in the cache then the connection is rejected

Author: I'll add further details to the redirection section

* the `username` element defines the username to connect to the target broker;
* the `password` element defines the password to connect to the target broker;
* the `check-period` element defines the often to check the target broker;
* the `quorum-size` element defines the minimum numbers of ready tagrets;
* the `local-target-enabled` element defines whether the pool has to include a local target;
* the `static-connectors` element defines a list of static connectors used by the [static pool](#static-pool);
* the `discovery-group` element defines the [discovery group](clusters.md#discovery-groups) used by the [discovery pool](#discovery-pool).

Let's take a look at a pool example from broker.xml:
```xml
<pool>
    <check-period>1000</check-period>
    <local-target-enabled>true</local-target-enabled>
    <quorum-size>2</quorum-size>
    <static-connectors>
        <connector-ref>connector1</connector-ref>
        <connector-ref>connector2</connector-ref>
        <connector-ref>connector3</connector-ref>
    </static-connectors>
</pool>
```

## Policies
The policy define how to select a broker from a pool. The included policies are:

> * `FIRST_ELEMENT` to select the first target broker from a pool;

Reviewer: the _ELEMENT seems odd? FIRST on it's own or HEAD (but that implies a list). Can you add a one liner when FIRST would make sense, ROUND_ROBIN with a single entry in a pool would behave the same.

Author: I can't find a better name so I used `FIRST_ELEMENT` to be consistent with the similar client load balancing policy: org.apache.activemq.artemis.api.core.client.loadbalance.FirstElementConnectionLoadBalancingPolicy

* `ROUND_ROBIN` to select a target sequentially from a pool.
* `CONSISTENT_HASH` to select a target by a key. This policy always selects the same target broker for the same key until it is removed from the pool.
* `LEAST_CONNECTIONS` to select the targets with the fewest active connections. This policy helps you maintain an equal distribution of active connections with the target brokers.

A policy is defined by the `policy` element. Let's take a look at a policy example from broker.xml:
```xml
<policy name="FIRST_ELEMENT"/>
```

## Cache
The broker balancer provides a cache with a timeout to improve the stickiness of the target broker selected.

> The broker balancer returns the same target broker for a target key until the target key is present in the cache and is ready.

Reviewer: until? should that be "as long as"

        <policy name="LEAST_CONNECTIONS"/>
        <pool>
            <discovery-group-ref discovery-group-name="dg2"/>
        </pool>
    </broker-balancer>
</broker-balancers>
```

## Broker Balancer Workflow
The broker balancer workflow include the following steps:
* Retrieve the target key from the incoming connection;
* Return the local target broker if the target key matches the local filter;
* Return the cached target broker if it is ready;
* Get ready target brokers from the pool;
* Select one target broker using the policy;
* Add the selected broker in the cache;
* Return the selected broker.

Let's take a look at flowchart of the broker balancer workflow:
![Broker Balancer Workflow](images/broker_balancer_workflow.png)

## Redirection
Apache ActiveMQ Artemis provides a native redirection for supported clients and a new management API for other clients.
The native redirection can be enabled per acceptor and is supported only for CORE and AMQP clients.
The acceptor with the `redirect-to` url parameter will redirect the incoming connections.
The `redirect-to` url parameter specifies the name of the broker balancer to use,

> ie the following acceptor will redirect the incoming CORE client connections using the broker balancer with the name `bb1`:

Reviewer: maybe it makes sense to reuse the name from above. in place of bb1 use 'consistent-hash-balancer' just to tie the url parameter to the name element of the xml. If I have that correct!

The local target is a special target that represents the same broker hosting the broker balancer.
The remote target is another reachable broker.

## Target Key
The broker balancer uses a target key to select a target broker.
It is a string retrieved from an incoming client connection, the supported values are:
* `CLIENT_ID` is the JMS client ID;
* `SNI_HOST` is the hostname indicated by the client in the SNI extension of the TLS protocol;
* `SOURCE_IP` is the source IP address of the client;
* `USER_NAME` is the username indicated by the client.

## Pools
The pool is a group of target brokers and checks periodically their state.
It provides a list of ready target brokers to distribute incoming client connections only when it is active.
A pool becomes active when the minimum number of ready target brokers defined by the `quorum-size` parameter is reached.
When it is not active, it doesn't provide any target avoiding weird distribution at startup or after a restart.
Including the local target broker in the pool allows broker hosting the broker balancer to accept incoming client connections. 

> By default, a pool doesn't include the local target broker, to include it the `local-target-enabled` parameter must be `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, a pool doesn't include the local broker, to include it as a target the `local-target-enabled` parameter must be `true`.
```
Moving 'target' for clarity, as it isnt a 'target broker' yet if it isnt in the pool, which is whats explained next.

* the `password` element defines the password to connect to the target broker;
* the `check-period` element defines the often to check the target broker;
* the `quorum-size` element defines the minimum number of ready targets to activate the pool;
* the `quorum-timeout` element defines the timeout to get the minimum number of ready targets;
* the `local-target-enabled` element defines whether the pool has to include a local target;
* the `static-connectors` element defines a list of static connectors used by the [static pool](#static-pool);
* the `discovery-group` element defines the [discovery group](clusters.md#discovery-groups) used by the [discovery pool](#discovery-pool).

Let's take a look at a pool example from broker.xml:
```xml
<pool>
    <quorum-size>2</quorum-size>
    <check-period>1000</check-period>
    <local-target-enabled>true</local-target-enabled>
    <static-connectors>
        <connector-ref>connector1</connector-ref>
        <connector-ref>connector2</connector-ref>
        <connector-ref>connector3</connector-ref>
    </static-connectors>
</pool>
```

## Policies
The policy define how to select a broker from a pool. The included policies are:

> * `FIRST_ELEMENT` to select the first target broker from a pool. It is useful to select the ready target brokers
>   according to the priority defined with their sequence order, ie supposing to have 2 target brokers
>   this policy selects the second target broker only when the first target broker isn't ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `FIRST_ELEMENT` to select the first target broker from the pool which is ready. It is useful to select the ready target brokers
  according to the priority defined with their sequence order, ie supposing there are 2 target brokers
  this policy selects the second target broker only when the first target broker isn't ready.
```

* `ROUND_ROBIN` to select a target sequentially from a pool, this policy is useful to evenly distribute;
* `CONSISTENT_HASH` to select a target by a key. This policy always selects the same target broker for the same key until it is removed from the pool.
* `LEAST_CONNECTIONS` to select the targets with the fewest active connections. This policy helps you maintain an equal distribution of active connections with the target brokers.

A policy is defined by the `policy` element. Let's take a look at a policy example from broker.xml:
```xml
<policy name="FIRST_ELEMENT"/>
```

## Cache
The broker balancer provides a cache with a timeout to improve the stickiness of the target broker selected.
The broker balancer returns the same target broker for a target key as long as it is present in the cache and is ready.
By default, the cache is enabled, to disable the cache the `cache-timeout` parameter must be `0`.

## Defining broker balancers
A broker balancer is defined by `broker-balancer` element, it includes the following items:
* the `name` attribute defines the name of the broker balancer;

> * the `target-key` element defines what key to select a target broker, the supported values are: `SNI_HOST`, `SOURCE_IP`, `USER_NAME`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the `target-key` element defines what key to select a target broker, the supported values are: `SNI_HOST`, `SOURCE_IP`, `USER_NAME`, `CLIENT_ID`.
```
Missing CLIENT_ID

* the `policy` element defines the policy used to select the target brokers, see [policies](#policies);

Let's take a look at some broker balancer examples from broker.xml:
```xml
<broker-balancers>
    <broker-balancer name="simple-balancer">
        <policy name="FIRST_ELEMENT"/>
        <pool>
            <static-connectors>
                <connector-ref>connector1</connector-ref>
                <connector-ref>connector2</connector-ref>
                <connector-ref>connector3</connector-ref>
            </static-connectors>
        </pool>
    </broker-balancer>
    <broker-balancer name="consistent-hash-balancer">
        <target-key>USER_NAME</target-key>
        <local-filter>admin</local-filter>
        <policy name="CONSISTENT_HASH"/>
        <pool>
            <local-target-enabled>true</local-target-enabled>
            <discovery-group-ref discovery-group-name="dg1"/>
        </pool>
    <policy name="CONSISTENT_HASH"/>
    </broker-balancer>
    <broker-balancer name="least-connections-balancer">
        <policy name="LEAST_CONNECTIONS"/>
        <pool>
            <discovery-group-ref discovery-group-name="dg2"/>
        </pool>

>     </broker-balancer>

Author: By default, the target key is SOURCE_IP and cache timeout is infinite.

>     </broker-balancer>

Reviewer 2: I don't recall seeing those values mentioned in the docs, might be worth adding, or making them more obvious if there.

>     </broker-balancer>

Author: doc updated
